I let us turn to the last pre-socratic
school that we are going to look at this
evening which is the school of
Pythagoras
the Pythagorean school now Pythagoras
flourished about 530 BC so technically
he's actually right after Haley's in
order and prior to permitted he's in
Heraclitus there's about 60 years after
thais in terms of flourishing but we
have no idea what Pythagoras said as
distinct from his followers because of
the absence of documents so it's common
simply to talk about the pythagoreans as
in school and not attempt to
differentiate which one was responsible
for which particular idea and I may say
the pythagoreans endured right on to the
very end of pagan philosophy and
underwent various modifications in their
views so it's common to talk about early
middle and late pythagoreans I will
hover around middle pythagoreans now
Pythagoras founded an enormous the
influential school and had overwhelming
effects on Plato and of course therefore
later on Christianity neither played on
nor Christianity would have been
possible without death agamous and his
school or some equivalent now basically
the early pythagoreans at least were a
mist except they lived communistical ii
without private-property
they were ineffective religious order or
Brotherhood they were far and away the
most otherworldly the most mystic of all
of the pre-socratics they are actually
the first religious philosophers that we
encounter in this course and therefore I
have to tell you at the outset something
about the religion to which they
subscribed they were not adherents of
the religion of the gods of Olympus they
did not take the anthropomorphic view of
the Gods the polytheistic view and so on
they represented a somewhat different or
rather take out the somewhat an enormous
ly different trend in Greek religion
they advocated what was called a mystery
religion which is much more religious
than a Mount Olympus
divinity has ever dreamed of this is
really religious it was a rabid mystic
supernaturalists cult in the early years
of a very primitive order and there were
quite a number of them and the ones that
the pythagoreans subscribed to what's
called the orphan mystery religion ORP
HIC with the capital so what it or
facism teach now or facism is not a
philosophy it's an oriental mystery cult
imported into Greece and that advocated
only by a minority was not the dominant
viewpoint well the oyx preached tenants
like this man has two parts I part in a
low part the low part is the body the
high part is the soul these two are in
eternal conflict with each other
the soul is akin to God to another
dimension
once it was a god-like creature
inhabiting another superior spiritual
world but it's sin and the result was it
fell from grace and as a punishment
wasn't included in the body on this
earth the body is therefore the prison
or the tomb of the soul and we are
destined each of us to go through a
series of reincarnation at the end of
our earthly span we go our soul goes
back to the Otherworld and it gets its
appropriate reward or punishment
depending upon its behavior and then it
comes around again what they call the
wheel of birth sometimes it comes up in
another human body sometimes an animal
body lives out its cycle and goes back
again round and round the wheel of birth
until and this was their ultimate hope
one day a soul can escape from the body
and this earth permanently reunite once
and for all with God and thereby
achieved true happiness and salvation in
fact the idea was go back home
how do you get to do it well they said
you have to engage in the process they
called purification purification that's
essentially a process of D contaminating
the soil of any physical influences you
have to live a good life which means
essentially an ascetic life a pleasure
denying life now I remind you we are in
ancient Greece and therefore the
pythagoreans that their most ascetic our
frenzied hedonists in comparison to the
Christians that are yet to come but
nevertheless they made a start and of
course you must also engage in the
rituals of the Orphic mystery religion
now in the early days these rituals
included something on the order of what
goes on in off-broadway now
mass orgies intoxication the frenzied
dancing secret initiation rites that's
why they were called mystery religions
it was a highly primitive to say the
least here's a description from one
commentator office isn't worshipped that
god Dionysus and he describes it as
Falls now enacted heroic self-abnegation
I will steadfastly abstain from
commenting or drawing parallels to any
subsequent Western religion quote the
god Dionysus was elaborated in the
Orphic mysteries originally a three
station deity of vegetation and
particularly of the vine and wine and of
the sense of liberation from human
bondage that intoxication bestows he was
worshipped in the beginning by orgiastic
rites of frenzied dancing and
drunkenness probably in the beginning
his priests in whom he was supposed to
be incarnate was sacrificed and eaten by
his worshippers who thus partook of the
mana or strength of their God but before
the cult entered Greece the sacrifice of
the priests had given
to that of a sacred animal the wild bull
which now became the vehicle for
communicating the divine substance of
the God to his devotees brought down
into Greece from the north his cult
became more civilized and developed a
complicated theology first begotten by
Zeus from a divine mother Persephone he
was he'd ionised was slain in the form
of a wild bull by the evil Titans and
was torn to pieces and devoured by them
but his heart was saved this Zeus ate
and begot him a second time from a human
mother
Cinelli she demanding to see her divine
lover face-to-face was consumed by a
thunderbolt her unborn child was
preserved and placed in the thigh of
zeus from which in the fullness of time
it was brought forth and made lord of
the world
the Titans also Zeus slew with a
thunderbolt and formed man from their
ashes
hence man is a jewel creature a mixture
of the evil substance of the Titans and
of the divine substance of the God they
devoured his soul or mind as a fragment
of Dionysus his body a heritage from the
Titans salvation consists in freeing the
divine within us from the bondage of the
body this can only be accomplished by a
long series of reincarnations at the end
of which if she has sufficiently
purified herself the soul may escape
from the wheel of birth and rebirth and
be reunited with her divine source
this purification however could only be
effected by joining the Orphic cult
assisting in its mysteries and following
his rule of life unquote now this
historically philosophically is the
primary source of the soul body
opposition in Western civilization no
better argument for that opposition has
ever been put forth
now I read recently that something like
50% of women on the continent of Europe
suffer from some type of sexual
frigidity partly caused by the feeling
that sex is vulgar and materialistic you
know how many businessmen feel guilty
because they're after money and there
are money grubbers and how many people
attack capitalist capitalism because
it's simply physical well if you ask the
ultimate root of that few he goes back
to these tales on
Dionysus back to the Orphic and prior to
that of course it has a long long
history now
the Pythagorean subscribed to orifices
they believed in two different worlds
the world of God in this world the soul
body conflict they yearn for immortality
and escape for the on the body they
believed in reincarnation
Pythagoras has alleged whether this is
to know but he knows to have seen a dog
being beaten one day and asked the man
to stop because he recognized from the
cries a friend of his preceding life now
the Orphic religion is obviously
enormous ly primitive it's a whole
series of typical taboos here are a few
typical ones if you're a good Orphic you
have to obey these rules these are so to
speak some of the divine Commandments if
you're a Norfolk I'm just reading you a
few to abstain from beans
not to pick up what has fallen not to
stir the fire with iron not to walk on
highways not to let swallows share ones
roof when the pot is taken off the fire
not to leave the mark of it in the ashes
but to stir them together when you rise
from the bedclothes roll them together
and smooth out the impress of the body
etc now this commentator says quote it
would be easy to multiply the proofs of
the close connection between pythagoras
pythagorean ism and primitive modes of
thought but what has been said is
sufficient for her purpose unquote and
that is certainly sufficient now this
sort of thing I may say was looked at
askance by most of the Greeks it was
certainly not in the mainstream of a
Greek religious views it was in effect
regarded as a lunatic fringe the
question is how did any of this stuff
get into the history of philosophy
because this is the caliber of stuff
that there was thousands and thousands
of years of prior to theories and the
answer is that Pythagoras had a
scientific side to him also he in his
school he was concerned they were
concerned with the same question as all
the other pre-socratics namely what is
the nature of the universe what is the
world stuff and in this connection they
made some valid and enormous ly
important points the result was that
their scientific discoveries and their
mystic or facism were propagated along
together as a kind of package deal and
in fact the combination became very
influential now I want to look at their
more philosophical side well they asked
the question what is the essence or
nature of the universe what is the world
stuff is it water is it air is it fire
is it change no they said well now to
understand their answer you have to know
something about their special interest
chivas the pythagoreans were really the
discoverers of mathematics in any
serious way now other civilizations had
discovered mathematical knowledge but
the pythagoreans were the first to
discover that mathematics is somehow
everywhere they did a lot of work in
mathematical theory and of course you
know about the Pythagorean theorem still
call that to this day they discovered
many interesting things about the
connection of mathematics to musical
phenomena a thing which was absolutely
unheard of prior to their discovery of
it they discovered for instance that
harmony in music as distinct from noise
is based on mathematical ratios the
length of the string being plucked they
discovered that musical relations can be
expressed numerically which was a
staggering discovery and we to this day
use mathematical terms to talk about
musical relationships like we talk about
an interval of a fifth or a fourth or an
octave which means an eighth and such
they discovered that mathematics is
relevant to astronomy they uncovered the
first hints that mathematical law
governs the heavens they discovered that
mathematics is somehow relevant to
medicine they had the idea that physical
health consists of the mathematical
ratio of the various elements of the
body and then if you have just the right
amount of each you're healthy but if one
and grows voraciously and destroys the
right mathematical balance well today we
would say you have cancer they would say
you're sick you're out of harmony in a
word wherever they looked and these are
the subjects that are known at this time
astronomy I mean some hints of it are
known mathematics music medicine they
found a fact that had not been known
that somehow or other the distinctive
character and action of things is
governed by numerical relationships by
mathematical laws you know word by
numbers numbers popped up everywhere and
who would have expected consequently
they did in effect what families did
when he thought water was the key or
what Eric laddus did when he thought
change was the key they seized on their
particular thing with him energy and
proceeded to make it metaphysical by a
gigantic leap they generalized and they
said you want to know what the world
stuff is you want to know what all
things really are all things are numbers
as their famous fragment all things are
numbers numbers are the world stuff now
commentators have worked for centuries
to try and figure out what could this
have meet because how can you talk about
numbers there isn't something being
numbered suppose I pointed this glass
you asked me what is it and I say it's
six
you say six what how could you have a
universe made of quantity without any
things being quantified well of course
Heraclitus has a universe of activity
without anything's performing it why
shouldn't Pythagoras have his too but in
any event commentators have struggled to
try and figure out what they could have
meant now a lot of this is speculative
because there are no surviving data that
would be fragments or documents that
would establish it definitely but some
people point out that because we're at
such an early stage of knowledge and the
pythagoreans are so primitive they took
the following view they represented
numbers by physical things for instance
little pebbles arranged three little
pebbles would be three and six little
pebbles would be 6 and so on or
sometimes by dots the way we have on
dice and so six for them meant six dots
or six pebbles arranged in a certain way
in other words they confuse numbers with
the physical entities which represent
them or symbolized and so sometimes when
they said all things are numbers they
meant all things are composed of tiny
physical particles so this was like a
primitive version of what later became
the atomic theory but the pythagorean's
never developed in part I may say the
explanation of this is simply their
autism their errant mysticism they were
the real numerological mystics and they
carried that to fantastic lengths that
you wouldn't believe about justice for
instance I believe if I remember
correctly there was a quarrel among the
Pythagorean as to whether justice was
four or nine
see the ideas they have to be a square
number because it had to return equal
for equal but whether it was 2 times 2
or 3 times 3 I hadn't decided marriage
was 5 and I once heard the explanation I
can't remember it
love is 8 because love is harmony
between people and the octave is a
harmony man if I remember was 250 plants
360 now this of course is just simply
nonsense and does not require deep
explanation and this is the Western
source of those skyscrapers I mentioned
earlier that have the 13th floor blanked
out except that isn't fair because the
moderns are worse than the pythagoreans
if the pythagoreans thought that 13 was
bad luck they would stop the building on
the 12th floor
they wouldn't add subjectivism they
didn't call the 13 14 now in part
besides these other features there is a
crucial point disguised in this
primitive mystic statement and the
crucial point is the vital importance of
mathematics in discovering the laws of
the world the vital importance of
mathematics and discovering the laws of
the world in making sense of the
universe now today people take this for
granted you understand that modern
physics would have been impossible
without the discovery that physical laws
have to be formulated in mathematical
terms
well this discovery actually develops
from the pythagoreans they're the ones
although they didn't discover any laws
they're the ones who discovered that
mathematics was the keystone and for
instance Kepler in the modern world in
the beginning of modern science man who
discovered the first mathematical laws
of planetary motion couldn't find them
for years but he was a devout
pythagorean and he went on looking
the grounds that all things are numbers
in there must be mathematical laws
governing the planets is sure enough you
found in this sends modern science is in
part a development of this discovery of
the pythagoreans however it did not bear
fruit until the Renaissance and when it
was confined combined with other
theories but for our purposes what is
important is what the later pythagoreans
did to make sense out of the theory that
all things are numbers now by the time
we get to the 4th century BC the later
pythagoreans understood that there is
something funny about saying that things
are made out of numbers the numbers are
literally the ingredients of things they
realize that's too primitive and so they
took the line that numbers or numerical
relations somehow govern the behavior of
things things they said are formed or
behave according to numbers and they
took this in a very literal and still
quite primitive sense now if you
considered people today saying for
instance that the law of gravity governs
the behavior of bodies
now you understand today that values of
the word govern is metaphorical you
don't think when you say that that
there's a disembodied law of gravity in
another dimension which says two things
so to speak you better fall or else like
a king governs his subjects but the
pythagoreans apparently did when they
said that numbers govern the things of
this world they apparently believed that
there were two dimensions this is the
later Pythagoras a world of numbers of
numerical relations and then this world
in which we live which was somehow
formed in accordance with the world of
numbers what are the characteristics of
the two worlds well of course the world
of numbers can't be grasped by the
senses you can't perceive the world of
numbers you can perceive two people but
not just two to itself you have to grasp
by reason and on the other hand this
world is
graspable by the census another point of
difference the world of numbers is
unchanging numbers don't change - and to
cut makes four goes on forever without
any alteration now any individual two
things can come into existence grow
decay die and vanish but - as such goes
on forever - is two and two and two is
four and so on you know word the world
numbers is immutable whereas the world
in which we live is constantly changing
so we have a metaphysical dualism two
realities and of course the true one is
the world of numbers now they thought
you see that they had thereby solved the
problem posed by Heraclitus and
Parmenides because they provided one
world for each Heraclitus said true
reality must be changing constantly
changed the Pythagorean said okay there
is a changing world for you in this
world or light everything is flowing
para manatee said but true reality has
to be unchanging they said you're right
- true reality is the world of numbers
now this particular attempt to solve the
apartment of the inherit legend dilemma
by apportioning two worlds for one for
each was picked up from the pythagoreans
by Plato in a somewhat different form as
we'll see next week in any event the
pythagoreans have now given an effective
philosophic grounding to their Orphic
religion they now had their heaven and
earth tied in with their two philosophic
world the world of numbers in this world
they had a philosophic basis for their
soul body opposition they had so to
speak synthesize their religion with
their science and they were happy now a
few last points to mop up the
pythagoreans
I didn't mean that pejoratively but one
legacy in epistemology of Pythagorean
ISM is the view that to be to knowledge
something must be mathematical but only
mathematics qualifies as true knowledge
now that is a common view among a
certain type today there's a type who
gives off what I guess you could
describe as a Pythagorean or not to say
older and that or as expressed in the
fact that if you do not give him
statements with numbers in them he will
not accept them as scientific if you
tell him for instance that human beings
need self-esteem that is quote a vague
qualitative unscientific inexact
but if you say they need 3.9 units of
self-esteem and they need an extra point
for every time they commit one eighth of
an act of the immorality or something
then that makes it mathematical now
that's a legacy of the Pythagorean
number fixation in regard to ethics of
course the major legacy left by the
pythagoreans was the mind body a soul
body dichotomy which they are the
founders of in Western philosophy and
the idea that the ultimate goal is to
escape from the body and have the soul
be pure now the development of that we
will see in Plato who got it from the
pythagoreans
you may ask well why didn't they commit
suicide if they were so anxious to
escape the body and they hadn't answered
that God giveth and God taketh away
it effect you belong to God and have you
commit suicide I'm parroting but the
idea is you're violating God's property
rights it's up to him to decide whether
or not to let you come home now what did
you do while on earth well as we say you
should purify yourself by withdrawing
from the physical well how are you going
to do that now here the pythagoreans
made a very famous observation
they distinguish three types of men who
come to the Olympic Games and I want to
tell you those three because it was
picked up later by Plato and became the
basis of a whole theory of human
psychology three types of men ranging in
a hierarchy from the lowest to the
highest now the lowest is the one most
directly involved with the physical the
guy who comes to make money for instance
to buy and sell popcorn the lover of
gain the man obsessed with the almighty
drachma
that's the lowest but above the lover of
gain there are the athletes and they are
motivated to qua a fleet not by the
disappoint of the pythagoreans not by
the desire for money
but for something somewhat more
spiritual namely honor fame triumph
glory now there are still materialistic
to an extent because they still want
their fame and glory in this physical
world but at least they're not so to
speak wallowing in the crude physical
and so they're one rung higher and then
there is the third type the type most
attached from the physical world the
type that doesn't want money or fame etc
the people in the stands the spectators
who simply want to look out and see
what's happening the ones who have
silane for Sophia who simply want to
acquire knowledge in a completely
disinterested way now those are the ones
if they're properly disinterested who
are cut off from the physical world and
they sure they are and therefore the
pythagoreans preached the supreme
importance of knowledge but it had to be
disinterested in knowledge the supreme
importance of philosophy and science but
divorced entirely from any physical
practical consequences or action
regarding life
on earth they preached philosophy
science knowledge as a religious right
as a rite of purification of the soul so
long as it was disinterested
non-commercial and non materialist and
this of course is the earliest severing
in Western philosophy of knowledge from
life it's the idea of knowledge as an
end in itself now you'll see what
happens to this and to the whole
Pythagorean view of three types of human
beings in Plato where it develops into a
full-blown psychology it ends up with
the view that there should be complete
communistic dictatorship that however is
all we're going to say that about the
pythagoreans they are the first to
reality school that we've met in a major
way and in this sense they are the
oldest religious super naturalistic
school in Western philosophy as we
continue we're going to trace the line
from the pythagoreans to Plato to the
whole Christian axis but all of it
including the mind body opposition the
yearning for an otherworldly immortality
the scorn for this life on earth goes
back originally to the Orphic
pythagoreans alright let's draw a line
here and next week we will continue with
the founders of the atomic theory
dear founders of skepticism and then
Socrates and Plato